<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 17</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h2>
			<p>There were no bands or speeches when they came in this time. A lot of contragravity vehicles circled widely around the spaceport, but except for a few news-service cars, the police were keeping them back of a two-mile radius around the landing-pits. A couple of gunboats were making tight circles above, and on the dock were more vehicles and a horde of police and guards.</p>
			<p>When Rodney Maxwell came across the bridge from the dock after they opened the airlocks, he was followed by a dozen Barton-Massarra private police, as villainous-looking a collection of ruffians as Conn had ever seen. He was wearing a new suit, with a waist-length jacket instead of the long coat he usually wore, and there was a holstered automatic on each hip. In Litchfield, he never carried more than one pistol, and Storisende was supposed to be an orderly place where nobody needed to go armed. More than anything else, that told Conn approximately what had been going on while he had been on Koshchei.</p>
			<p>“Ship-guard,” his father told Yves Jacquemont. “All your crew can come off; they’ll take care of things. Get your people in that troop carrier over there. Everybody will stay at Interplanetary Building. None of the hotels are safe, not even the Ritz-Gartner. And be sure everybody’s well armed when they come off the ship.”</p>
			<p>Jacquemont nodded. “I know the drill; I’ve been in Port Oberth on Venus and Skorvann on Loki. Any law we want, we make for ourselves.”</p>
			<p>“That’s about it. I’ll see you there. Conn, I wish you’d come with me. Somebody here wants to talk to you.”</p>
			<p>He wondered if his mother, or Flora, had come to Storisende. When he asked his father as they crossed onto the dock, there was a brief twinge of pain in Rodney Maxwell’s face.</p>
			<p>“No, they’re not having anything to do⁠—<em>Duck; quick!</em>”</p>
			<p>Then his father was diving under a lifter-truck that stood empty on the dock. The private police were scattering for cover, and an auto-cannon began pom-pomming. Conn took one quick look in the direction in which it was firing, saw an aircar that had broken through the police line and was rushing toward them, and dived under the lifter after his father. As he did, he saw a missile flash out from one of the gunboats like a thrown knife. Then he huddled beside his father and put his arms over his head.</p>
			<p>He felt the heat and shock of the explosion and, an instant later, heard the roar. When nothing immediately disastrous happened after he had counted fifteen seconds, he stuck his head out and looked up. The gunboat was struggling to regain her equilibrium, and the aircar had vanished in a fireball. They both emerged, straightening. His father was brushing himself with his hands and saying something about always having to duck under something when he had a new suit on.</p>
			<p>“Robot control, probably; could have been launched from anywhere in town. Why, no; your mother and Flora aren’t speaking to either of us, any more. Pity, of course, but I’m glad they’re in Litchfield. It’s a little healthier there.”</p>
			<p>They walked to the slim recon-car and climbed in, pulling the door shut after them. Wade Lucas was waiting for them at the controls.</p>
			<p>“There, you see!” he began, as soon as he had the car lifting. “What I’ve been telling you. We’ll have to stop this.”</p>
			<p>“Conn, meet our new partner. I told him everything you told me, out on the Mall, the day you came home. I had to,” his father hastened to add. “He’d figured most of it out for himself. The only thing to do was admit him to the lodge and give him the oath.”</p>
			<p>“I didn’t know about General Travis; I didn’t even know he was still alive,” Lucas said. “But the rest of it was pretty obvious, once I stopped jumping to conclusions and did a little thinking. You know, ever since I came here I’ve been preaching to these people to stop looking for Merlin and do something to help themselves. You’re smarter than I am, Conn; instead of opposing them, you’re guiding them.”</p>
			<p>“Did you tell Flora?”</p>
			<p>Lucas shook his head. “I tried to explain what you’re trying to do, but she wouldn’t listen. She just told me I’d gotten to be as big a crook as you two.” He had the car up to fifty thousand; putting it into a wide circle around the city, he locked the controls and got out his cigarettes. “Rod, we’ve got to stop this. You were just lucky this time. Some of these days your luck’s going to run out.”</p>
			<p>“How can we stop?” Conn demanded. “Tell them the truth? They’d lynch us, and then go on hunting for Merlin.”</p>
			<p>“Worse than that; it’d be a smash worse than the one when the War ended. I was only ten then, but I can remember that very plainly. We can’t stop it, and we wouldn’t dare stop it if we could.”</p>
			<p>“What’s been going on here in the last month?” Conn asked. “I’ve been too busy to keep in touch. I know there’s been rioting, and these crackpot sects, but …”</p>
			<p>“I think this is personal to us. There have been some ugly things happening. There were four attempts to burglarize our offices. I told you about some of the other stuff, the microphones we found, and so on. The worst thing was Lucy Nocero, my secretary. She just vanished, a couple of weeks ago. Three days later, the police found her wandering in a park, a complete imbecile. Somebody who either didn’t know how to use one or didn’t care what happened had used a mind-probe on her. It’s twenty to one she’ll never recover.”</p>
			<p>“It’s this Storisende financial crowd,” Wade Lucas said. “They had things all their own way till Alpha-Interplanetary was organized. Now they’re getting shoved into the background, and they don’t like it.”</p>
			<p>“They’re making more money than they ever did, and they just love it,” Rodney Maxwell said. “I’d think it was either Jake Vyckhoven or Sam Murchison.”</p>
			<p>“Murchison!” Lucas hooted. “Why, he’s nobody! Federation Minister-General; all the authority of the Terran Federation, and nothing to enforce it with. He doesn’t have a position, here; he has a disease. Sleeping sickness.”</p>
			<p>“He certainly doesn’t believe there is a Merlin, does he?” Conn asked.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know what he believes, but he’s getting to be Klem Zareff’s opposite number. He thinks this whole thing’s a plot against the Federation. It’s a good thing Klem didn’t get around to repainting his combat vehicles black and green, the way he did the Home Guard stuff at Litchfield.”</p>
			<p>“I’d be more likely to think it was Vyckhoven.”</p>
			<p>“Could be. Or it could be the Armageddonists, or Human Supremacy; I am ashamed to say that this heil-Merlin Cybernarchist gang are friendly to us. Or it could be some of the banking crowd, or some of these rival space-companies. Barton-Massarra is trying to find out. Well, we have some of Wade’s pet suspects at Interplanetary Building now. There’s been a meeting going for the last week to partition the Alpha Gartner System.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The Interplanetary Building had been a medium-class residence hotel at the time of the War. Junior staff officers and civilian technicians and their families had lived there. It had been vacant ever since the disastrous outbreak of peace. Now it had a big new fluorolite sign, and housed the offices of all the Maxwell companies. There was a truculent display of anti-vehicle weapons on the top landing stage, and more Barton-Massarra private police. They looked even more villainous then the ones at the spaceport. Conn recalled having heard that most of the Blackie Perales gang had been discharged for lack of evidence; he wondered how many of them had hired with Barton-Massarra.</p>
			<p>The meeting was in a big conference room six floors down; it had been going on uninterrupted for days, with all the interested companies’ representatives standing watch-and-watch around the clock. Lester Dawes and Morgan Gatworth and Lorenzo Menardes were there for <abbr>L. E. &amp; S.</abbr>; Transcontinent &amp; Overseas was represented; there were people from Alpha-Interplanetary, and bankers and financiers, and people from the companies building the two ships at the spaceport. And <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Fitzwilliam Sterber, the lawyer.</p>
			<p>And reporters, phoning stories in and getting audiovisual interviews of anybody who would hold still long enough. They converged in a rush as Conn and his father and Lucas came in.</p>
			<p>“No statement, gentlemen!” Rodney Maxwell shouted, above the babble of their questions. “When we have anything to release, it will be released to all of you.”</p>
			<p>Jacquemont and Nichols had already arrived; Lucas went to them and began talking about stevedores and lifters to get off the cargoes from the ships. Conn hastened to join them.</p>
			<p>“The scanning and mining equipment aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Helen O’Loy</i>,” he said. “That shouldn’t be unloaded here; we’ll take the ship out to Force Command and unload it there.”</p>
			<p>Out of the corner of his eye, he saw, a lurking reporter snatch the handphone off his radio and begin talking; it would be stated authoritatively that Merlin was at Force Command and would be uncovered as soon as special equipment from Koshchei arrived.</p>
			<p>Everybody at the long table was shouting at everybody else. The Jurgen and Janicot Companies wanted to buy ships from Koshchei Exploitation &amp; Development. The Alpha-Interplanetary director, who was also a vice-president of Transcontinent &amp; Overseas, opposed that; another director of A-I, who was also board chairman of Koshchei Exploitation &amp; Development, wanted to sell ships to anybody who had the price, the Transcontinent &amp; Overseas man was calling him a traitor to the company, and one of the stockbrokers, who was also a vice-president of Trisystem Investments and a director of Trisystem &amp; Interstellar Spacelines, was wanting to know which company. And a banker who was stockholder in all the companies was shouting that they were all a gang of crooks, and <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Fitzwilliam Sterber was declaring that anybody who called him a crook could continue the discussion through seconds.</p>
			<p>Conn suddenly realized that dueling had never been illegal on Poictesme. He wondered how many duels this meeting was going to hatch.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The next afternoon the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Helen O’Loy</i> was unloaded, all but the mining equipment; Conn and Yves Jacquemont and Charley Gatworth and a few others took her out to Force Command. They were met by Klem Zareff’s armed airboats two hundred and fifty miles from the mesa, and they found the place in more of a state of siege than when the Badlands had been full of outlaws. A lot of heavy armament seemed to have been moved in from Barathrum Spaceport, and Zareff had more men and firepower than he had ever commanded during the System States War. If Minister-General Murchison was convinced that the Merlin excitement was a cover for some seditious plot against the Federation, this ought to give him food for thought.</p>
			<p>There was still work, mostly boring lateral shafts for echo shots, going on at the butte, under the relay station. That was Leibert, who was still insisting that that was where Merlin was buried. There was also some work on top of the mesa, by those who were convinced that that was where Merlin was to be found. Kurt Fawzi was taking the lead in that. Franz Veltrin and Dolf Kellton sided with Leibert, and Fawzi’s office clique had split into two factions. Judge Ledue was maintaining strict impartiality, as befitted his judicial position.</p>
			<p>“Why hasn’t your father gotten those detectives of his to work on this fake preacher?” Zareff wanted to know, when he and Tom Brangwyn were able to talk to Conn alone.</p>
			<p>“Well, they’ve been busy,” Conn said. “Trying to keep him alive, for one thing. You heard about the robo-bomb somebody launched at us the day we brought the ships in, didn’t you?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, and we heard about the Nocero girl, too,” Brangwyn said. “But hasn’t it ever occurred to you or your dad that this fellow that calls himself Leibert might be mixed up with the gang that did that?”</p>
			<p>“You suspect him, too?”</p>
			<p>Brangwyn nodded. “I took a few audiovisuals of him, when he didn’t know it; I sent them to some different law-enforcement people over in Morven, where he says he comes from. They never saw him before, and couldn’t find anybody who did.”</p>
			<p>“Well? He just doesn’t have a police record, then.”</p>
			<p>“He says he’s a preacher. Preachers don’t go off in the woods by themselves to preach; they get up in pulpits, in front of a lot of people. Those towns over in Morven are small enough for everybody to have known something about him. He’s a fake, I tell you.”</p>
			<p>“Let me have copies of those audiovisuals, Tom. I’ll see what can be found out about him. I’m beginning to wonder about him myself. I’m sure I’ve seen him, somewhere …”</p>
			<p>When he got back to Storisende, he found that the marathon conference on the sixth floor down at the Interplanetary Building had finally come to an end. Everybody seemed satisfied, and apparently nobody was going to have pistols and coffee with anybody else about it.</p>
			<p>“We have things fixed up,” his father told him. “The gang who are building the ship out of four air-freighters are chartered as Janicot Industries, <abbr>Ltd.</abbr>; they’re going to specialize in chemical products. The other company has a charter now, too. They’re going to operate on Jurgen and Horvendile. We’ll sell them ships, and Alpha-Interplanetary will put on scheduled trips to all three planets and also Koshchei. We’re getting along very nicely with them, except that everybody’s competing for technicians and skilled labor. We have two hundred more people signed up for Koshchei. What you want to do is train as many of them as you can for ship-operation. Alpha-Interplanetary is going to start a training program here at Storisende; you’d better leave one of your ships for them to work on, and send back as many ships as you can find officers and crews for.”</p>
			<p>“We’re getting things really started.”</p>
			<p>“Yes. The only trouble is …” His father frowned. “I don’t understand these people, Conn. Everybody ought to be making millions out of this by this time next year, but all any of them, even these Storisende bankers, can talk about is how soon we’re going to find Merlin.”</p>
			<p>“I wish we could stop that, somehow. Listen; I have it. Merlin never was on Poictesme; Merlin was a space-station a few thousand miles off-planet; there was a crew of operators aboard, and they communicated with Force Command by radio. When the War ended, they took it outside the system and shot off a planetbuster inside her. No more Merlin. How would that be?”</p>
			<p>His father shook his head. “Wouldn’t do. If anybody believed it, which I doubt, they’d just quit. The market would collapse, everybody would be broke, it would just be the end of the War all over again. Conn, we can’t let it stop now. We’re going too fast to stop; if we tried it, we’d smash up and break our necks.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
