<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h2>
			<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Harriet Barne</i> settled comfortably at the dock, the bunting-swathed tugs lifting away from her. They had the outside sound pickups turned as low as possible, and still the noise was deafening. The spaceport was jammed, people on the ground and contragravity vehicles swarming above, with police cars vainly trying to keep them in order. All the bands in Storisende seemed to have been combined; they were blaring the “Planetary Hymn”;</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“Genji Gartner’s body lies a-moldering in the tomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But his soul goes marching on!”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>When they opened the airlock, there was a hastily improvised ceremonial barge, actually a farm-scow completely draped in red and white, the Planetary colors. They all stopped, briefly, as they came out, to enjoy the novelty of outdoor air which could actually be breathed. Conn saw his father in the scow, and beside him Sylvie Jacquemont, trying, almost successfully, to keep from jumping up and down in excitement. Morgan Gatworth to meet his son, and Lester Dawes to meet his. Kurt Fawzi, Dolf Kellton, Colonel Zareff, Tom Brangwyn. He didn’t see his mother, or his sister. Flora he had hardly counted on, but he was disappointed that his mother wasn’t there to meet him.</p>
			<p>Sylvie was embracing her father as he shook hands with his; then she threw her arms around his neck.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Conn, I’m so happy! I was watching everything I could on-screen, everything you saw, and all the places you were, and everything you were doing⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>The scow⁠—pardon, ceremonial barge⁠—gave a slight lurch, throwing them together. Over her shoulder, he saw his father and Yves Jacquemont exchanging grins. Then they had to break it up while he shook hands with Fawzi and Judge Ledue and the others, and by the time that was over, the barge was letting down in front of the stand at the end of the dock, and the band was still deafening Heaven with “Genji Gartner’s Body,” and they all started up the stairs to be greeted by Planetary President Vyckhoven; he looked like an elderly bear who has been too well fed for too long in a zoo. And by Minister-General Murchison, who represented the Terran Federation on Poictesme. He was thin and balding, and he looked as though he had just mistaken the vinegar cruet for the wine decanter. Genji Gartner’s soul stopped marching on, but the speeches started, and that was worse. And after the speeches, there was the parade, everybody riding in transparent-bodied aircars, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lester Dawes</i> and the two ships of the new Planetary Air Navy and a swarm of gunboats in column five hundred feet above, all firing salutes.</p>
			<p>In spite of what wasn’t, but might just as well have been, a concerted conspiracy to keep them apart, he managed to get a few words privately with Sylvie.</p>
			<p>“My mother; she didn’t get here. Is anything wrong?”</p>
			<p>“Is anything anything else? I’ve been in the middle of it ever since you went away. Your mother’s still moaning about all these companies your father’s promoting⁠—he never used to do anything like that, and it’s all too big, and it’s going to end in a big smash. And then she gets onto Merlin. You know, she won’t say Merlin, she always calls it, ‘that thing.’ ”</p>
			<p>“I’ve noticed that.”</p>
			<p>“Then she begins talking about all the horrible things that’ll happen when it’s found, and that sets Flora off. Flora says Merlin’s a big fake, and you and your father are using it to rob thousands of widows and orphans of their life savings, and that sets your mother off again. Self-sustaining cyclic reaction, like the Bethe solar-phoenix. And every time I try to pour a little oil on the troubled waters, I find I’ve gotten it on the fire instead. And then, Flora had this fight with Wade Lucas, and of course, she blames you for that.”</p>
			<p>“Good heavens, why?”</p>
			<p>“Well, she couldn’t blame it on herself, could she? Oh, you mean why the fight? Lucas is in business with your father now, and she can’t convince him that you and your father are a pair of quadruple-dyed villains, I suppose. Anyhow, the engagement is <em>phttt</em>! Conn, is my father going back to Koshchei?”</p>
			<p>“As soon as we can round up some people to help us on the ship.”</p>
			<p>“Then I’m going along. I’ve had it, Conn. I’m a combat-fatigue case.”</p>
			<p>“But, Sylvie; that isn’t any place for a girl.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, poo! This is Sylvie. We’re old war buddies. We soldiered together on Barathrum; remember?”</p>
			<p>“Well, you’d be the only girl, and⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“That’s what you think. If you expect to get any kind of a gang together, at least a third of them will be girls. A lot of technicians are girls, and when work gets slack, they’re always the first ones to get shoved out of jobs. I’ll bet there are a thousand girl technicians out of work here⁠—any line of work you want to name. I know what I’ll do; I’ll make a telecast appearance. I still have some news value, from the Barathrum business. Want to bet that I won’t be the working girl’s Joan of Arc by this time next week?”</p>
			<p>That cheered him. A girl can punch any kind of a button a man can, and a lot of them knew what buttons to punch, and why. Say she could find fifty girls⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>He had a slightly better chance to talk to his father before the banquet at the Executive Palace that evening. They shared the same suite at the Ritz-Gartner, and even welcoming committees seldom chase their victims from bedroom to bath.</p>
			<p>“Yes, I know all about it,” Rodney Maxwell said bitterly. “I was home, a couple of weeks ago. Flora simply will not speak to me, and your mother begged me, in tears, to quit everything we’re doing here. I tried to give her some idea of what would happen if I dropped this, even supposing I could; she wouldn’t listen to me.” He finished putting the studs in his shirt. “You still think this is worth what it’s costing us?”</p>
			<p>“You saw the views we sent back. There’s work on Koshchei for a million people, at least. Why, even these two makeshift ships they’re putting together here at Storisende are giving work, one way or another, to almost a thousand. Think what things will be like a year from now, if this keeps on.”</p>
			<p>Rodney Maxwell gave a wry laugh. “Didn’t know I had a real Simon-pure altruist for a son.”</p>
			<p>“Pardner, when you call me that, smile.”</p>
			<p>“I am smiling. With some slight difficulty.”</p>
			<p>He didn’t think well of the banquet. Back in Litchfield, Senta would have fired half her human help and taken a sledgehammer to her robo-chef for a meal like that. Even his father’s camp cook would have been ashamed of it. And there were more speeches.</p>
			<p>President Vyckhoven managed to get hold of him and Yves Jacquemont afterward, and steered them into his private study.</p>
			<p>“Have you any real reason for thinking that Merlin might be on Koshchei?” the Planetary President asked.</p>
			<p>“Great Ghu, no! We weren’t looking for Merlin, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> President. We were looking for a hypership. We have one, too. Calling her <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ouroboros <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>. Twenty-five-hundred-footer. We expect to have her to space in a few months. I surely don’t need to tell you what that will do toward restoring planetary prosperity.”</p>
			<p>“No, of course not; a hypership of our own. But⁠ ⁠…” He looked from one to the other of them. “But I understood⁠ ⁠… That is, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Kurt Fawzi was saying⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Fawzi is looking for Merlin here on Poictesme. If anybody finds it, that’s where it’ll be found. I’m interested in getting business started again. If Merlin is found, it would help, of course.” He shrugged.</p>
			<p>“Don’t look at me,” Jacquemont said. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Maxwell⁠—both of them, father and son⁠—want some spaceships. They hired me to help build them. That’s all I have in it.” Then he relit the cigar the President had given him and leaned back in his chair, staring at the stuffed alcesoid head with the seven-foot hornspread above the fireplace.</p>
			<p>Conn described the interview to his father after they were back at the hotel.</p>
			<p>“I hope you convinced him. You know, he’s afraid of Merlin. A lot of people have been saying that if Merlin’s found, it should be used to determine government policy. A few extremists are beginning to say that Merlin ought to <em>be</em> the government, and Jake Vyckhoven and his cronies ought to be dumped. Into the handiest mass-energy converter, preferably. You know, if anybody found Merlin and started it auditing the Planetary Treasury, Jake Vyckhoven’d be the one who’d be wanting a hypership.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Tom Brangwyn ran him down the next morning in the dining room.</p>
			<p>“Conn, I wish you’d come along with me,” he said. “Some of us are up in Kurt’s suite; we’d all like to talk to you.”</p>
			<p>Somehow, he was acting as though he were making an arrest. That might have been nothing but professional habit. Conn went up to Fawzi’s suite, and found Fawzi and Judge Ledue and Dolf Kellton and close to a dozen others there.</p>
			<p>“I’m glad you could come, Conn,” the Judge greeted him. Now that the defendant had arrived, the trial could begin. “I wish your father could have gotten here. I asked him to come, but he had a prior engagement. A meeting with some of the financial people here, about some company he’s interested in.”</p>
			<p>“That’s right; Trisystem &amp; Interstellar Spacelines.”</p>
			<p>“Interstellar!” Kurt Fawzi almost howled. “Great Ghu! Now it isn’t enough to go out to Koshchei; he wants to go clear out of the Trisystem. That’s what we wanted to talk about; all this nonsense you and your father are in. Merlin’s right here on Poictesme. It’s right at Force Command, and if your father hadn’t robbed us of all our best men, like Jerry Rivas and Anse Dawes, we’d have found it by now. I don’t think you and your father care a hoot if we ever find Merlin or not!”</p>
			<p>“Kurt, that’s a dreadful thing to say,” Dolf Kellton objected in a shocked voice.</p>
			<p>“It’s a dreadful thing to have to say,” Fawzi replied, “but you tell me what Conn Maxwell or Rodney Maxwell are doing to help find it.”</p>
			<p>“Who showed you where Force Command was?” Klem Zareff asked.</p>
			<p>Nobody could think of any good quick comeback to that.</p>
			<p>Conn took advantage of the pause to ask, “Why do you want to find Merlin?”</p>
			<p>“Why do we⁠ ⁠…” Fawzi spluttered indignantly. “If you don’t know⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“I know why I do. I want to see if you do. Do you?”</p>
			<p>“Merlin would answer so many questions,” Dolf Kellton told him gently. “Questions I can’t answer for myself.”</p>
			<p>“With Merlin, we could set up a legal code and a system of jurisprudence that would give everybody absolute justice,” Judge Ledue said.</p>
			<p>As if absolute justice wasn’t the last thing anybody in his right senses would want; a robot-judge would have the whole planet in jail inside a month.</p>
			<p>“We have a man who joined us after you went off to Koshchei, Conn,” Franz Veltrin said. “A <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Carl Leibert. He’s some kind of a clergyman, from over Morven way. He says that Merlin could formulate an entirely new religion, which would regenerate humanity.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I don’t have any such lofty ideas,” Fawzi said. “I just want Merlin to show us how to get some prosperity here; bring things back to what they were before Poictesme went broke.”</p>
			<p>“And that’s what Father and I are trying to do. You’re going into the woods with a book on how to chop down a tree, and no ax.” Fawzi looked at him in surprise, started to say something, and thought better of it. “If we want prosperity, we need tools. Our problem is loss of markets. If we find Merlin, and tape it with everything that’s happened in the forty years since it was shut down, Merlin will tell us where to find new markets. But the markets won’t come to us. We’ll have to do our own exporting, and we’ll need ships. Now, you men have been studying about Merlin, and hunting for Merlin, all your lives. I can’t add anything to what you know, and neither can my father. You find Merlin, and we’ll have the ships ready when you do find it.”</p>
			<p>“Kurt, I think he has a point,” somebody said.</p>
			<p>“You’re blasted well right he has,” Klem Zareff put in. “If it wasn’t for Conn Maxwell, you know where we’d be? Back in Litchfield, sitting around in Kurt’s office, talking about how wonderful things’ll be when we find Merlin, and doing nothing to find it.”</p>
			<p>“Kurt, I believe Conn is entitled to an apology,” Judge Ledue ruled. “How close we are to finding Merlin I don’t know, but it is due to him that we have any hope of finding it at all.”</p>
			<p>“Conn, I’m sorry,” Fawzi said. “I oughtn’t to have said some of the things I did. But we’re all on edge; we’ve been having so much trouble⁠ ⁠… Conn, it’s right there at Force Command; I know it is. We’ve been all over the place. We have shafts sunk at each of the corners; we’ve used scanners, and put off echo shots. Nothing. We looked for additional passages out of the headquarters; there aren’t any. But it has to be somewhere around. It just <em>has</em> to be!”</p>
			<p>“Maybe if I go out to Force Command with you, I might see something you’ve overlooked. And if I can’t, I’ll try to scrape up some stuff on Koshchei for you. Deep-vein scanners, that sort of thing, from the mines.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>They took the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lester Dawes</i> out at a little past noon and turned south and east. Everybody aboard was happy⁠—except Conn Maxwell. He was thinking of the years and years ahead of these trusting, hopeful old men, each year the grave of another expectation. Two hundred miles from Force Command, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Goblin</i> met them, her sides still spalled and dented from the hits she had taken in Barathrum Spaceport. When they came in sight of it, the mesa-top was deserted. Fawzi began wondering where in Nifflheim all the drilling rigs, and the seismo-trucks, were. Somebody with a pair of binoculars called attention to activity on the side of the high butte on top of which the relay station was located. Fawzi began swearing exasperatedly.</p>
			<p>“Might be something <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Leibert thought of,” Franz Veltrin suggested.</p>
			<p>“Then why in blazes didn’t he screen us about it?”</p>
			<p>“Who is this Leibert?” Conn asked. “Somebody mentioned him this morning, I think.”</p>
			<p>“He joined us after you left, Conn,” Dolf Kellton said. “He’s a clergyman from Morven. No regular denomination; he has a sect of his own.”</p>
			<p>“Yah, he would!” Klem Zareff rumbled. “Pious fraud!”</p>
			<p>“He’s really a good man, Conn; Klem’s prejudiced. He says we ought to use Merlin to show us the true nature of God, and how to live in accordance with the Divine Will. He says Merlin can teach us a new religion.”</p>
			<p>A new religion, based on Merlin; that would be good. And then the fanatics who thought Merlin was the Devil would start a holy war to wipe out the servants of Satan, and with all the combat equipment that was lying around on this planet⁠ ⁠… For the first time since this business started, he began to feel really frightened.</p>
			<p>An aircar came bulleting away from the butte and landed on the mesa as the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lester Dawes</i> set down. The man who met them at the head of the vertical shaft wore Federation fatigues⁠—baggy trousers, ankle boots and long smock, dyed black. He was bareheaded, and his white hair was almost shoulder-long. He had a white beard.</p>
			<p>“Welcome, Brothers,” he greeted, a hand raised in benediction. “And who is this with you?”</p>
			<p>His voice was high and quavery; not a good pulpit voice, Conn thought.</p>
			<p>Kurt Fawzi introduced Conn, and Leibert grasped his hand with a grip that was considerably stronger than his voice.</p>
			<p>“Bless you, young man! It is to you alone that we owe our thanks that we are about to find the Great Computer. Every sapient being in the Galaxy will honor your name for a thousand years.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I hadn’t counted on quite that much, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Leibert. If it’ll only help a few of these people to make a decent living I’ll be satisfied.”</p>
			<p>Leibert shook his head sadly. “You think entirely in material terms, young man,” he reproved. “Forget these things; acquire the higher spiritual values. The Great Computer must not be degraded to such uses; we should let it show us how to lift ourselves to a high spiritual plane⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>It went on like that, after they went down to Foxx Travis’s⁠—now Fawzi’s⁠—office, where there were silver-stoppered decanters instead of the old green-glass pitcher, and gold-plated ashtrays, and thick carpets on the floor. The man was a lunatic; he made Fawzi’s office gang look frigidly sane. Furthermore, he was an ignoramus. He had no idea what a computer could or couldn’t do. Anybody who could build a computer of the sort he thought Merlin was wouldn’t need it, he <em>would</em> be God.</p>
			<p>As he talked, Conn began to be nagged by an odd sense of recognition. He’d seen this Carl Leibert before, somewhere, and somehow he was sure that the long white hair and the untrimmed beard weren’t part of the picture. That puzzled him. He doubted if he’d have remembered Leibert from six years ago, almost seven, now, though a lot of itinerant evangelists showed up in Litchfield. That might have been it.</p>
			<p>“I tell you, the Great Computer is there, in the heart of the butte,” Leibert was insisting, now. “It has been revealed to me in a dream. It is completely buried. After it was made, no human touched it. The men who were here and used it in the War communicated with it only by radio.”</p>
			<p>That could be so. There were fully robotic computers, intended for use in places where no human could go and live. There was a big one on Nifflheim, armored against the fluorine atmosphere and the hydrofluoric-acid rains. But there was no point in that here, the things were enormously complicated, and military engineering of any sort emphasized simplicity⁠—<em>Aaaagh!</em> Was he beginning to believe this balderdash himself?</p>
			<p>Klem Zareff fell in with him as they were going to dinner. “Revealed in a dream!” the old Rebel snorted. “One thing you can always get away with lying about is what you dream.”</p>
			<p>“You think he’s lying? I think he’s just crazy.”</p>
			<p>“That’s what he wants you to think. Look, Conn, he knows Merlin is here; he’s trying to keep us from it. That’s why he shifted all that equipment over on the butte. He’s working for Sam Murchison.”</p>
			<p>“I thought your theory was that the Federation had lost Merlin.”</p>
			<p>“It was, at first. It doesn’t look that way to me now. It’s right here at Force Command, somewhere. They don’t want it found, and they’re going to do everything they can to stop us. I oughtn’t to have left this fellow Leibert here alone; well, I won’t do that again. Get Tom Brangwyn to help me.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
