<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 11</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body>
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XI</h2>
			<p>The shooting died down to occasional rattles of small arms, usually followed by yells for quarter. An explosion thundered from across the crater. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lester Dawes</i> fired her big guns a few times. A machine gun stuttered. A pistol banged, far away. It took two hours before all the pirates had been hunted out of hiding and captured, or killed if found by their former captives, who were accepting no surrender whatever.</p>
			<p>Blackie Perales had been one of the latter; he had been found, his clothes in rags and covered with dirt and grease, hiding under a machine in one of the shops back of the dock in which the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Harriet Barne</i> was being rebuilt. He had tried to claim that he was one of the pirates’ prisoners who had eluded the roundup at the beginning of the battle and had been hiding there since. As soon as the real prisoners saw and recognized him, they had fallen upon him and clubbed, kicked and stamped him out of any resemblance to humanity. At that, what he got was probably only a fraction of what he deserved.</p>
			<p>The egg breakage had been heavy, and not at all confined to the bad eggs. A third gunboat, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Banshee</i>, had been destroyed with all hands during the final attack from outside; in addition, a dozen men had been killed during the fighting in the galleries. Everybody was shocked, except Klem Zareff, who had been in battles before. He was surprised that the casualties had been so light.</p>
			<p>At first glance, the spaceport looked like a handsome prize of victory. The docks and workshops were all in good condition; at worst, they only needed cleaning up. There was a collapsium plant, with its own mass-energy converter. There were foundries and machine-shops and forging-shops and a rolling-mill, almost completely robotic. At first, Conn thought that it might be possible to build a hyperdrive ship here, without having to go to Koshchei at all.</p>
			<p>Closer examination disabused him of this hope. There was nothing of which the framework of a ship could be built, and no way of producing heavy structural steel. The rolling-mill was good enough to turn out eighth-inch sheet material which when plated with a few micromicrons of collapsium would be as good as a hundred feet of lead against space-radiations, but that was the ship’s skin. A ship needed a skeleton, too. The only thing to do was go on with the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Harriet Barne</i>.</p>
			<p>It was sunset before he finished his tour of inspection and let his jeep down in a vehicle hall off the lower gallery outside what had originally been the spaceport officers’ club. It was crowded, and a victory celebration seemed to be getting under way. He saw his father with Yves Jacquemont, Sylvie, Tom Brangwyn, and Captain Nichols. Nichols had gotten clean clothes from the pirates’ store of loot, and had bathed and shaved. So had Jacquemont, though he had contented himself with trimming his beard. It took him a second or so to recognize the young lady in feminine garb as his erstwhile battle comrade, Sylvie.</p>
			<p>“Well, our pay goes on from the day we were captured,” Nichols was saying. “My instructions are to resume command of the ship. Tomorrow, they’re sending a party out to go over her.”</p>
			<p>Conn stopped short. “What’s this about the ship?”</p>
			<p>“Captain Nichols was in screen contact with his company’s office in Storisende,” Rodney Maxwell said. “They’re continuing him in command of her.”</p>
			<p>“But … but we took that ship! We lost three gunboats and about twenty-five men …”</p>
			<p>“She still belongs to Transcontinent &amp; Overseas,” his father said. “That’s been the law on stolen property as long as there’s been any law.”</p>
			<p>Of course; he should have known that. Did know it; just didn’t think.</p>
			<p>“We broke an awful lot of eggs for no omelet; fought a battle for nothing.”</p>
			<p>“Well, of course, I’m prejudiced,” Sylvie said, “but I don’t think getting us out of the hands of that bloodthirsty maniac and his cutthroats was nothing.”</p>
			<p>“Wiping out the Perales gang wasn’t nothing, Conn,” Tom Brangwyn said. “You got no idea at all how bad things were, the last couple of years.”</p>
			<p>“I know. I’m sorry.” He was ashamed of himself. “But I needed a ship, and now we have no ship at all.”</p>
			<p>“A ship means something to you?” Yves Jacquemont asked.</p>
			<p>“Yes.” He told him why. “If we could get to Koshchei, we could build a hypership of our own, and get our brandy and things to markets where we could get a decent price for them.”</p>
			<p>“I know. I was in and out of Storisende on these owner-captain tramps for a couple of years before I decided to retire and settle here,” Jacquemont said. “The profit on a cargo of Poictesme brandy on Terra or Baldur is over a thousand percent.”</p>
			<p>“Well, don’t give up too soon,” Nichols advised. “You can’t keep the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Harriet Barne</i>, of course, but you’re entitled to prize-money on her, and that ought to buy you something you could build a spaceship out of.”</p>
			<p>“That’s right,” Jacquemont said. “Everything else besides the frame can be made here. Look, these pirates burned me out; except for the money I have in the bank, I lost everything, home, business and all. As soon as I can find a place for Sylvie to stay, I’ll come back and go to work for your company building a spaceship. And a lot of the men who were working here are farm-tramps and drifters, one job’s as good as another as long as they get paid for it. And I know a few good men in Storisende⁠—engineers⁠—who’d be glad for a job, too.”</p>
			<p>“You think it would be all right with Mother and Flora if Sylvie stayed with us?” Conn asked.</p>
			<p>“Of course it would; they’d be glad to have her.” Rodney Maxwell turned to Yves Jacquemont. “Let’s consider that fixed up. Now, suppose you and I go into Storisende, and …”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The Transcontinent &amp; Overseas people arrived at Barathrum Spaceport the next morning; a rear-rank vice-president, a front-rank legal-eagle, and three engineers. They were horrified at what they saw. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Harriet Barne</i> had been gutted. Bulkheads and decks had been ripped out and relocated incomprehensibly; the bridge and the control room under it were gone; she had been stripped to her framework, and the whole underside was sheathed in shimmering collapsium.</p>
			<p>“Great Ghu!” the vice-president almost howled. “That isn’t <em>our</em> ship!”</p>
			<p>“That’s the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Harriet Barne</i>,” her captain said. “She looks a little ragged now, but⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You helped these pirates do this to her?”</p>
			<p>“If I hadn’t, they’d have cut my throat and gotten somebody else to help them. My throat’s more valuable to me than the ship is to you; I can’t get anybody to build me a new one.”</p>
			<p>“Well, understand,” one of the engineers said, “they were converting her into an interplanetary ship. It wouldn’t cost much to finish the job.”</p>
			<p>“We need an interplanetary ship like we need a hole in the head!” The vice-president turned to Rodney Maxwell. “Just how much prize-money do you think you’re entitled to for this wreck?”</p>
			<p>“I wouldn’t know; that’s up to Sterber, Flynn &amp; Chen-Wong. Up to the court, if we can settle it any other way.”</p>
			<p>“You mean you’d litigate about this?” the lawyer demanded, and began to laugh.</p>
			<p>“If we have to. Look, if you people don’t want her, sign her over to Litchfield Exploration &amp; Salvage. But if you do want her, you’ll have to pay for her.”</p>
			<p>“We’ll give you twenty thousand sols,” the lawyer said. “We don’t want to be tightfisted. After all, you fought a gang of pirates and lost some men and a couple of boats; we have some moral obligation to you. But you’ll have to realize that this ship, in her present state, is practically valueless.”</p>
			<p>“The collapsium on her is worth twice that, and the engines are worth even more,” Jacquemont said. “I worked on them.”</p>
			<p>The discussion ended there. By midafternoon, Luther Chen-Wong, the junior partner of the law firm, arrived from Storisende with a couple of engineers of his own. Reporters began arriving; both sides were anxious to keep them away from the ship. Conn took care of them, assisted by Sylvie, who had rummaged an even more attractive costume out of what she called the loot-cellar. The reporters all used up a lot of film footage on her. And the Fawzis’ Office Gang arrived from Force Command, bitterly critical of the value of the spaceport against its cost in lives and equipment. Brangwyn and Zareff returned to Force Command with them. A Planetary Air Patrol ship arrived and removed the captured pirates. The liberated prisoners were airlifted to Litchfield.</p>
			<p>The third day after the battle, Conn and his father and Sylvie and her father flew to Litchfield. To Conn’s surprise, Flora greeted him cordially, and Wade Lucas, rather stiffly, congratulated him. Maybe it was as Tom Brangwyn had said; he hadn’t been on Poictesme in the last four or five years and didn’t know how bad things had gotten. His mother seemed to think he had won the Battle of Barathrum single-handed.</p>
			<p>He was even more surprised and gratified that Flora made friends with Sylvie immediately. His mother, however, regarded the engineer’s daughter with badly concealed hostility, and seemed to doubt that Sylvie was the kind of girl she wanted her son getting involved with. Outwardly, of course, she was quite gracious.</p>
			<p>Rodney Maxwell and Yves Jacquemont flew to Storisende the next morning, both more optimistic about finding a ship than Conn thought the circumstances warranted. Conn stayed at home for the next few days, luxuriating in idleness. He and Sylvie tore down his mother’s household robots and built sound-sensors into them, keying them to respond to their names and to a few simple commands, and including recorded-voice responses in a thick Sheshan accent. All the smart people on Terra, he explained, had Sheshan humanoid servants.</p>
			<p>His mother was delighted. Robots that would answer when she spoke to them were a lot more companionable. She didn’t seem to think, however, that Sylvie’s mechanical skills were ladylike accomplishments. Nice girls, Litchfield model, weren’t quite so handy with a spot-welder. That was what Conn liked about Sylvie; she was like the girls he’d known at the University.</p>
			<p>They were strolling after dinner, down the Mall. The air was sharp and warned that autumn had definitely arrived; the many brilliant stars, almost as bright as the moon of Terra, were coming out in the dusk.</p>
			<p>“Conn, this thing about Merlin,” she began. “Do you really believe in it? Ever since Dad and I came to Poictesme, I’ve been hearing about it, but it’s just a story, isn’t it?”</p>
			<p>He was tempted to tell her the truth, and sternly put the temptation behind him.</p>
			<p>“Of course there’s a Merlin, Sylvie, and it’s going to do wonderful things when we find it.”</p>
			<p>He looked down the starlit Mall ahead of him. Somebody, maybe Lester Dawes and Morgan Gatworth and Lorenzo Menardes, had gotten things finished and cleaned up. The pavement was smooth and unbroken; the litter had vanished.</p>
			<p>“It’s done wonderful things already, just because people started looking for it,” he said. “Some of these days, they’re going to realize that they had Merlin all along and didn’t know it.”</p>
			<p>There was a faint humming from somewhere ahead, and he was wondering what it was. Then they came to the long escalators, and he saw that they were running.</p>
			<p>“Why, look! They got them fixed! They’re running!”</p>
			<p>Sylvie grinned at him and squeezed his arm.</p>
			<p>“I get you, chum,” she said. “Of course there’s a Merlin.”</p>
			<p>Maybe he didn’t have to tell her the truth.</p>
			<p>When they returned to the house, his mother greeted him:</p>
			<p>“Conn, your father’s been trying to get you ever since you went out. Call him, right away; Ritz-Gartner Hotel, in Storisende. It’s something about a ship.”</p>
			<p>It look a little time to get his father on-screen. He was excited and happy.</p>
			<p>“Hi, Conn; we have one,” he said.</p>
			<p>“What kind of a ship?”</p>
			<p>“You know her. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Harriet Barne</i>.”</p>
			<p>That he hadn’t expected. Something off Mothball Row that would have to be flown to Barathrum and torn down and completely rebuilt, but not the one that was there already, partly finished.</p>
			<p>“How the dickens did you wangle that?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, it was Yves’ idea, to start with. He knew about her; the T. &amp; O.’s been losing money on her for years. He said if they had to pay prize-money on her and then either restore her to original condition or finish the job and build a spaceship they didn’t want, it would almost bankrupt the company. They got up as high as fifty thousand sols for prize-money and we just laughed at them. So we made a proposition of our own.</p>
			<p>“We proposed organizing a new company, subsidiary to both <abbr class="name">L. E. &amp; S.</abbr> and T. &amp; O., to engage in interplanetary shipping; both companies to assign their equity in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Harriet Barne</i> to the new company, the work of completing her to be done at our spaceport and the labor cost to be shared. This would give us our spaceship, and get T. &amp; O. off the hook all around. Everybody was for it except the president of T. &amp; O. Know anything about him?”</p>
			<p>Conn shook his head. His father continued:</p>
			<p>“Name’s Jethro Sastraman. He could play Scrooge in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Christmas Carol</i> without any makeup at all. He hasn’t had a new idea since he got out of college, and that was while the War was still going on. ‘Preposterous; utterly visionary and impractical,’ ” his father mimicked. “Fortunately, a majority of the big stockholders didn’t agree; they finally bullied him into agreeing. We’re calling the new company Alpha-Interplanetary, we have an application for charter in, and that’ll go through almost automatically.”</p>
			<p>“Who’s going to be the president of this new company?”</p>
			<p>“You know him. Character named Rodney Maxwell. Yves is going to be vice-president in charge of operations; he’s flying to Barathrum tomorrow or the next day with a gang of technicians we’re recruiting. T. &amp; O. are giving us Clyde Nichols and Mack Vibart, and a lot of men from their shipyard. I’m staying here in Storisende; we’re opening an office here. By this time next week, we’re all going to wish we’d been born quintuplets.”</p>
			<p>“And Conn Maxwell, I suppose, will be an influential non-office-holding stockholder?”</p>
			<p>“That’s right. Just like in <abbr class="name">L. E. &amp; S.</abbr>”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
