<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body>
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h2>
			<p>The car Rodney Maxwell got out of the hangar the next morning wasn’t the one he and Conn had gone to the meeting in; it was the one he had flown in from Tenth Army HQ at noon of the previous day. An Army reconnaissance job, slim and needlelike, completely enclosed, looking more like a missile than a vehicle, and armored in dazzling, iridescent collapsium. There was something to living on Poictesme, at that; only a millionaire on Terra could have owned a car like that.</p>
			<p>“Nice,” Conn said. “Where did you dig it?”</p>
			<p>“Where we’re going, Tenth Army.”</p>
			<p>“I’ll bet she’ll do Mach Three.”</p>
			<p>“Better than that. I’ve never had her above 2.5, but the airspeed gauge is marked up to four. And she has everything: all kinds of detection instruments, cameras, audiovisual pickups, armament. And the armor; you can take her through any kind of radiation.”</p>
			<p>The armor was only a couple of micromicrons thick, but it would stop anything. It was collapsed matter, the electron shells of the atoms collapsed upon the nuclei, the atoms in actual contact. That plating made eighth-inch sheet steel as heavy as twelve-inch armor plate, and in texture and shielding properties, lead was like sponge by comparison.</p>
			<p>They climbed in, and Rodney Maxwell snapped on the screens that served as windows. Conn leaned back and looked at the underside view in a screen on the roof of the car, as his father started the lift-engine.</p>
			<p>“Still think it’s worth the price, son?” his father asked.</p>
			<p>The price had begun to rise; even so, he was afraid that what they had paid so far was only the down payment. Dinner last evening. Flora, who had evidently been talking to Wade Lucas, shouting accusations at them; his mother fleeing from the table in tears. As the car rose, he reached out and turned on and adjusted the telescreen for the under-view.</p>
			<p>“Keep your eye on that, Father,” he said. “That’s what we’re paying to get rid of.”</p>
			<p>A distillery, bigger than the Menardes plant, long closed and now half roofless and crumbling. Rows of warehouses, empty after the War until taken over by homeless vagrants. Jerry-built shanties with rattletrap aircars grounded around them. Tramptown, a festering sore on the south side of Litchfield.</p>
			<p>“If we put this over,” he continued, “all those tramps will have steady work and good homes. We can have a park there, with fountains that’ll work. Maybe even Flora and Mother will think we’ve done something worth doing.”</p>
			<p>“It’ll be kind of hard to take in the meantime, though, but if you can take it, I can.” Rodney Maxwell turned off the underside teleview screen and put on the forward one. “See that little pink spot over there? Sunrise on the east side of Snagtooth; Tenth Army’s just behind us. Now, let’s see if this airspeed gauge is telling the truth or just bragging.”</p>
			<p>Sudden acceleration pushed them back in their seats. The calibrations on the gauge rose swiftly; the pink-lighted peak grew swiftly in the teleview screen. The gauge hadn’t been bragging, it had been understating; the car had more speed than the instrument could register. Two and a half minutes from Litchfield, they were decelerating and swinging slowly around Snagtooth, looking down on a tilted plateau that ended on the western side in a sheer drop of almost a thousand feet.</p>
			<p>There were ruinous buildings on it: barracks and storehouses and offices, an airship dock and an air-traffic control tower from which all the glass had long ago vanished, a great steel telecast tower that had fallen, crushing a couple of buildings. Young trees had already grown among the wreckage.</p>
			<p>“Look over there, on the slope below it; there’s one entrance to the shelters.” There was a clearing among the evergreens, half a mile from the buildings, and raw earth, and a couple of big scows grounded near. “They bulldozed rock and earth over the end of the tunnel. Then, there’s another one down on that bench, a couple of hundred feet below the edge of the plateau. They blasted rock down over that. The main entrance is a vertical shaft under that pre-stressed concrete dome. That was chapel, auditorium, or something. They just covered it with sheet metal and poured a foot of concrete on top.”</p>
			<p>They floated down above the broken roofs and crumbling walls, and grounded in the area between the main administration building and the offices, back of the ship docks. Once, he supposed, it had been a lawn. Then it had been a jungle. Now it was a scuffed, littered, bare-trodden work-yard. Men were straggling out of the administration building, lighting pipes and cigarettes; they all wore new but work-soiled infantry battle dress. All of them waved and shouted greetings; one, about Conn’s own age, approached. As he got out, Conn saw the resemblance to Lester Dawes, the banker, before he recognized Anse Dawes, who had been one of his closest friends six years ago. They shook hands and pounded each other on the back.</p>
			<p>“Hey, you’re looking great, Conn!” They all told him that; he’d begin to believe it pretty soon. “Sorry I couldn’t make the party, but somebody had to sit on the lid here, and Jerry Rivas and I cut cards for it and Jerry won.”</p>
			<p>“You didn’t tell me Anse was with you,” he reproached his father. Rodney Maxwell said he’d been saving that for a surprise.</p>
			<p>When Conn asked Anse what was the matter with the bank, he said: “For the birds; I’d as soon count sheets of toilet paper as this stuff we’re using for money. Sooner. Toilet paper can be used for something, and this paper money’s too stiff. Maybe some of this stuff we’re digging here isn’t worth much, but at least it’s real.”</p>
			<p>That was something else the Maxwell Plan would have to take care of. Gresham’s Law was running hog-wild on Poictesme. A Planetary Government sol was worth about ten centisols, Federation, and aside from deposit boxes, woolen socks under the mattress, and tin cans buried in the corner of the cellar, Federation currency was nonexistent.</p>
			<p>“Had breakfast yet?” Rodney Maxwell asked.</p>
			<p>“Oh, hours ago. I was out and shot another spikenose; it’s hanging up back of the kitchen, waiting for the cook to skin it and cut it up.” He grinned at Conn. “You don’t get this kind of hunting in a bank, either.”</p>
			<p>“Jerry still inside? I want to see him. Suppose you take Conn around and show him the sights. And don’t worry about him bumping you out of a job. Worry about the six or eight extra jobs you’ll have to do besides your own, from now on.”</p>
			<p>Conn and Anse crossed the yard and entered one of the office buildings, through a big breach in the wall. Anse said: “I did that myself; 90-mm tank gun. When we want a wall out of the way, we get it out of the way.” Inside were a lot of lifters and skids and power shovels and things; laborers were assembling for work assignments. Most of them had been with his father six years ago and he knew them. They hadn’t done any growing up in the meantime. They climbed into an airjeep and floated out over the edge of the plateau, letting down past the sheer cliff to where the lower lateral shaft had been opened. A great deal of rock had been shoveled and bulldozed away to expose it; it was twenty feet high and forty wide. Anse simply steered the jeep inside and up the tunnel.</p>
			<p>There were occasional lights on at the ceiling. Anse said they were all powered from their own nuclear-electric conversion units. “We don’t have the central power on here; there’s a big mass-energy converter, but we’re tearing it down to ship out.”</p>
			<p>That was something they could get a good price for. Maybe even one-tenth of what it was worth. At least they wouldn’t have to sell it by the ton.</p>
			<p>The tunnel ended in an enormous room a couple of hundred feet square and fifty high. There was a wide aisle up the middle; on either side, contragravity equipment was massed. Tanks with long 90-mm guns. Combat cars. Small airboats. Rank on rank of air-cavalry single-mounts, egg-shaped things just big enough for a man to sit in, with quadruple machine guns in front and flame-jets behind. Ambulances armored against radiation; decontamination units; mobile workshops; mobile kitchens. Troop carriers, jeeps, staff cars; power shovels, manipulators, lifters. All waiting, for forty years, to swarm out as soon as the bombs that never came stopped falling.</p>
			<p>They floated the jeep along hallways beyond, and got down to look into rooms. Work was already going on in the power plant; a gang under a slim young man whom Anse introduced as Mohammed Matsui were using repair-robots to get canisters of live plutonium out of a reactor. Workshops. Laundries. Storerooms. Kitchens, some stripped and a few still intact. A hospital. Guardhouse and lockup.</p>
			<p>More storerooms on the level above, reached by returning to the vehicle hangar and lifting to an upper entrance. By this time, gangs were at work there, too, moving contragravity skids in empty and out loaded.</p>
			<p>“The CO here must have had squirrel blood,” Anse said. “I think when the evacuation orders came through he just gathered up everything there was topside and crammed it down here, any old way. Honest to Ghu, this place was packed solid when we found it. Nobody’d believe it.”</p>
			<p>“Wait till you see the next one.”</p>
			<p>“You mean there’s another place like this?”</p>
			<p>“You can say so. You can say a twenty-megaton thermonuclear is like a hand grenade, too.”</p>
			<p>Anse Dawes simply didn’t believe that.</p>
			<p>When they got back to the Administration Building on top, they found Rodney Maxwell, Jerry Rivas, the general foremen, and half a dozen gang foremen, in consultation.</p>
			<p>“We’re getting a hundred and fifty more men and ten farm scows from Litchfield,” his father said. “Dave McCade’s coming out from our yard, and Tom Brangwyn’s sending one of his deputies to help boss them. Well have to keep an eye on this crowd; they’re all Tramptown hoodlums, but that’s the best we can get. We’re going to have to get this place cleaned out in a hurry. We only have about two weeks till the wine-pressing’s over, and then we want to start the next operation. Conn, did you see all that engineering equipment, down on the bottom level?”</p>
			<p>“Yes. I think we ought to leave a lot of that here⁠—the shovels and bulldozers and manipulators and so on. We can move it direct to Force Command. How are we fixed for blasting explosives?”</p>
			<p>“Name it and we have it. Cataclysmite, FJ-7, anything you want.”</p>
			<p>“We’ll need a lot of it.”</p>
			<p>“We’re going to have to get a ship. I mean a contragravity ship, a freighter; first, to move this stuff out of here, and then to move the stuff out of Force Command. And we want it mounted with heavy armament, too. We not only want a freighter, we want a fighting ship.”</p>
			<p>“You think so?”</p>
			<p>“I’m sure of it,” Rodney Maxwell said. “Where we’re going is full of outlaws; there must be hundreds of them holing up over there. That’s where all the trouble on the east coast comes from. Now, outlaws are sure-thing players. They want to be alive to spend their loot, and they won’t tackle anything that’s too tough for them. A lot of guards and combat equipment may look like a loss on the books, but the books won’t show how much of a loss you might take if you didn’t have them. I want this operation armed till it’ll be too much for all the outlaws on the planet to tackle.”</p>
			<p>That made sense. It also made sense out of the billions of sols the Federation had spent preparing for an invasion that never came. If it had come and found them unprepared, the loss might have been the war itself.</p>
			<p>The scows and the newly hired workers began arriving a little after noon. The scows had been borrowed from plantations where the crop had been gotten in; there were melon leaves and bits of vine in the bottoms. The workers were a bleary-eyed and unsavory lot; Conn had a suspicion, which Brangwyn’s deputy confirmed, that they had been collected by mass vagrancy arrests in Tramptown. As soon as they started arriving, Jerry Rivas hurried down to the old provost-marshal’s headquarters and came back with a lot of rubber billy-clubs, which he issued to his gang-bosses, regular and temporary. A few times they had to be used. By evening, however, the insubordinate and troublesome had been quieted. They would all steal anything they could put in their pockets, but that was to be expected. By evening, too, the contents of the underground treasure trove was moving out in a steady stream, and scows were shuttling to and from Litchfield.</p>
			<p>Rodney Maxwell was going back to town after lunch the next day. Conn wanted to know if he should go along.</p>
			<p>“No, you stay here; help keep things moving. Remember what I told you about the older and wiser heads? Let me handle them. I’ve been around them, heaven pity me, longer than you have. Just give me an audiovisual of your proxy and I’ll vote your stock.”</p>
			<p>“How much stock do I have, by the way?”</p>
			<p>“The same as I have⁠—ten thousand five hundred shares of common, at twenty centisols a share. But watch where it goes after we open Force Command.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>His father was back, two days later, to report:</p>
			<p>“We’re organized. Kurt Fawzi’s president, of course, and does he love it. That’ll keep him out of mischief. Dolf Kellton’s secretary; he has an office force at the Academy and can conscript students to help. He’s organizing a research team from his seniors and post-grad students to work in the Planetary Library at Storisende. There are a lot of old Third Force records there; he may find something useful. Of course, Lester Dawes is treasurer.”</p>
			<p>“What are you?”</p>
			<p>“Vice-president in charge of operations. That’s what I spent all yesterday logrolling, baby-kissing and cigar-passing to get.”</p>
			<p>“And what am I, if it’s a fair question?”</p>
			<p>“You have a very distinguished position; you are a non-office-holding stockholder. The only other one is Judge Ledue; as a member of the judiciary, he did not feel it proper to accept official position in a private corporation. Tom Brangwyn’s Chief of Company Police; Klem Fawzi is Commander of the Company Guards. And we have a law firm in Storisende lined up to handle our charter application. Sterber, Flynn &amp; Chen-Wong. Sterber’s married to Jake Vyckhoven’s sister, Flynn’s son is married to the daughter of the Secretary of the Treasury, and Chen-Wong is a nephew of the Chief Justice. All of them are directly descended from members of Genji Gartner’s original crew.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t anticipate any trouble about getting the charter?”</p>
			<p>“Not exactly. And Lester Dawes is in Storisende now, trying to find us a contragravity ship. There are about a dozen in the hands of receivers for bankrupt shipping companies; he might find one that’s still airworthy. Oh; you remember how I insisted on absolute secrecy about our Merlin objective? That’s working out better than my fondest expectations. It’s leaking like a machine-gunned water tank, and everybody it leaks to is positive that we know exactly where Merlin is or we wouldn’t be trying to keep it a secret.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Three days later, Conn hitched a ride on a freight-scow to Litchfield. From the air, he could see a haze of bonfire smoke over High Garden Terrace, and a gang of men at work. There were more men at work on the Mall and along the streets on either side. He went up from the yard below the house, where the scow was being unloaded, and found his mother in the living room watching a screen play with one eye and keeping the other on a soulless machine like a miniature contragravity tank, which was going over the carpet with a vacuum cleaner and taking swipes at the furniture with a rotary dustmop. She was glad to see him, and then became troubled.</p>
			<p>“Conn, when Flora comes home, you won’t argue with her, will you?”</p>
			<p>“Only in self-defense.” That was the wrong thing to say. He changed it to, “No; I won’t argue with her at all,” and then quoted Wade Lucas quoting Thomas Paine. Then he had to assure his mother a couple of times that there really was a Merlin, and then assure her that it wouldn’t get loose and hurt anybody if he did find it.</p>
			<p>In the middle of his assurances about the harmlessness of Merlin, the housecleaning-robot began knocking things off the top of a table.</p>
			<p>“Oscar! You stop that!” his mother yelled.</p>
			<p>Oscar, deaf as the adder, kept on. Conn yelled at his mother to use her control; she remembered that she had one, a thing like an old-fashioned pocket watch, around her neck on a chain, and got the robot stopped.</p>
			<p>No wonder she was afraid of Merlin.</p>
			<p>He took advantage of the interruption to get to his room and change clothes, then went up to the hangar and got out an air-cavalry mount. About fifty men were working on High Garden Terrace, pruning and trimming and leveling the lawns. There was a big vitrifier on the Mall⁠—even at five hundred feet he could feel the heat from it⁠—chuffing and clanking and pouring lavalike molten rock for a new pavement. And all the nymphs and satyrs and dryads and fauns and centaurs had had their pedestals rebuilt and were sandblasted clean.</p>
			<p>He landed on the top of the Airlines Building and rode a lift down to the office where Kurt Fawzi neglected the affairs of his shipline agency, his brokerage business, and the city of Litchfield. The afternoon habitués had begun to gather⁠—Raymond Fitch, the used-vehicles dealer, Lorenzo Menardes, Judge Ledue, Tom Brangwyn, Klem Zareff. Fawzi was on the screen, talking to somebody with sandy hair and a suit that didn’t seem to be made of any sort of Federation Armed Forces material, about warehouse facilities. The addresses they were mentioning were in Storisende.</p>
			<p>“No, Leo, I don’t know when,” Fawzi was saying, “but don’t you worry. You just have space for it, and we’ll fill it up. And don’t ask me what sort of stuff. You know what a salvage operation’s like; you just haul out the stuff as you come to it.”</p>
			<p>Tom Brangwyn, lounging in one of the deep chairs, looked up.</p>
			<p>“Hello, Conn. We’re having a time. Another two hundred tramps came in on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Countess</i> this morning, and Ghu only knows how many in their own vehicles, and they all seem to think if there’s work for some there ought to be work for all, and some of them are getting nasty.”</p>
			<p>“We can use some more out at the dig. The ones you sent out Thursday are doing all right, once they found out we weren’t taking any foolishness.”</p>
			<p>Fawzi turned away from the screen. “Well, Conn, we’re in,” he said. “The charter was granted this morning; now we’re Litchfield Exploration &amp; Salvage, <abbr>Ltd.</abbr> And Lester Dawes has found us a contragravity ship.”</p>
			<p>“How much will it cost us?”</p>
			<p>Fawzi began to laugh. “Conn, this’ll slay you! She isn’t costing us a centisol. You know those old ships on Mothball Row, back of the old West End ship docks at Storisende?”</p>
			<p>Conn nodded. He’d seen them before he had gone away, and from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">City of Asgard</i> coming in⁠—a lot of old Army Transport craft, covered with muslin and sprayed with protectoplast. The Planetary Government had taken them over after the War and forgotten them.</p>
			<p>“Well, Lester’s getting one of them for us under the old 878 Commercial Enterprise Encouragement Act. She’s an Army combat freighter, regimental ammunition ship. Of course, she still has armament; we’ll have to pay to get that off.”</p>
			<p>“Why?”</p>
			<p>Fawzi looked at him in surprise. “It would only be in the way and add weight. We want her for a cargo ship, don’t we?”</p>
			<p>“That’s what she was built for. What kind of armament?”</p>
			<p>Fawzi didn’t know. Klem Zareff did.</p>
			<p>“Four 115-mm rifles, two fore and two aft. A pair of lift-and-drive missile launchers amidships. And a secondary gun battery of 70-mm’s and 50-mm auto-cannon. I know the class; we captured a few of them. Good ships.”</p>
			<p>Fawzi was horrified. “Why, that’s more firepower than the whole Air Patrol. Look, the Government won’t like our having anything like that.”</p>
			<p>“They’re giving her to us, aren’t they?” Menardes asked.</p>
			<p>“Gehenna with what the Government likes!” the old Rebel swore. “If they’d put a few of those ships into commission, they could wipe out these outlaws and a private company wouldn’t need an armed ship.”</p>
			<p>“May I use your screen, Kurt?” Conn asked.</p>
			<p>When Fawzi nodded, he punched out the combination of the operating office at Tenth Army, and finally got his father on. He told him about the ship.</p>
			<p>“There’s talk about tearing the armament out,” he added.</p>
			<p>“Is that so, now? Well, I’ll call Lester Dawes before he can get started on it. I think I’ll go in to Storisende tomorrow and see the ship for myself. See what I can do about ammunition for those guns, too.”</p>
			<p>“But, Rod,” Fawzi protested, joining the conversation, “we don’t want to start a war.”</p>
			<p>“No. We want to stay out of one. You don’t do that by disarming. We’re taking that ship down into the Badlands. Remember?” Rodney Maxwell said. “Ever hear the name Blackie Perales?”</p>
			<p>Fawzi had. He stopped arguing about armament. Instead, he began worrying about how much the civic cleanup campaign was costing Litchfield.</p>
			<p>“You think we really need that, Rod?”</p>
			<p>“Of course we do. You’d be surprised how much labor we’re going to need, and how hard up we’re going to be for capable supervisors. This thing’s a training program, Kurt, and we’ll need every man we train on it.”</p>
			<p>“But it’s costing like Nifflheim, Rod. We’re going to bankrupt the city.”</p>
			<p>“Worse than it is now, you mean? Oh, don’t worry, Kurt. As soon as we find Merlin, everything’ll be all right.”</p>
			<p>Franz Veltrin came in, shortly after Rodney Maxwell was off the screen. He dropped his audiovisual camera and sound recorder on the table, laid his pistol-belt on top of them and took a drink of brandy, downing it with the audible satisfaction of a thirsty horse at a trough. Then he looked around accusingly.</p>
			<p>“Somebody’s been talking!” he declared. “I’ve had all the news services on the planet on my screen today; they all want the story about what’s happening here. They’ve heard we know where Merlin is; that Conn Maxwell found out on Terra.”</p>
			<p>“They just put two and two together and threw seven,” Conn said. “A <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald-Guardian</i> ship-news reporter interviewed me when I got in, and found out I’d been studying cybernetics and computer theory on Terra. What did you tell them?”</p>
			<p>“Complete denial. We don’t know a thing about Merlin. Naturally, they didn’t believe me. A bunch of them are coming out here tomorrow. What are we going to tell them? We’ll all have to have the same story.”</p>
			<p>“I,” said Judge Ledue, “am not going to be interviewed, I am leaving town till they’re gone.”</p>
			<p>“Why don’t you steer them onto Wade Lucas?” Conn asked. “If you want anything denied, he’ll do it for you.”</p>
			<p>Everybody thought that was a wonderful idea, except Klem Zareff, and he waited until Conn was ready to go and rode up to the landing stage with him.</p>
			<p>“Conn, I know this Lucas is going to marry your sister,” he began, “but how much do you know about him?”</p>
			<p>“Not much. He seems like a nice chap. I don’t hold what he said at the meeting against him. I suppose if I’d come from off-planet, I wouldn’t believe in Merlin either.”</p>
			<p>“Hah! But doesn’t he believe in Merlin?”</p>
			<p>“He makes noises like it.”</p>
			<p>“You know what I think?” Klem Zareff lowered his voice to a whisper. “I think he’s a Federation spy! I think the Federation’s lost Merlin. That’s why they haven’t come back to get it long ago.”</p>
			<p>“Pretty big thing to mislay.”</p>
			<p>“It could happen. There’d only be a few scientists and some high staff officers who’d know where it was. Well, say they all went back to Terra on the same ship, and the ship was lost at space. Sabotage, one of our commerce raiders that hadn’t heard the War was over, maybe just an ordinary accident. But the ship’s lost, and the location of Merlin’s lost with her.”</p>
			<p>“That could happen,” Conn agreed seriously.</p>
			<p>“All right. So ever since, they’ve had people here, listening, watching, spying. This Lucas; he showed up here about a year after you went to Terra. And who does he get engaged to? Your sister. And what does he do here? Goes around arguing that there is no Merlin, getting people to argue with him, getting them mad, so they’ll blurt out anything they know. I’m an old field officer; I know all the prisoner-interrogation tricks in the book, and that’s always been one of the best.”</p>
			<p>“Then why did he act the way he did at the meeting? All he did there was cut himself off from learning anything more from any of us. In his place, would you have done that? No; you’d have tried to take the lead in hunting for Merlin yourself. Now wouldn’t you?”</p>
			<p>Zareff was silent, first puzzled, and then hurt. Now he would have to tear the whole idea down and build it over.</p>
			<p>Flora was quite friendly when she came home from school. She’d found out, somewhere, that Conn had been the originator of the municipal face-lifting project. He was tempted, briefly, to tell her a little, if not all, of the truth about the Maxwell Plan, then decided against it. The way to keep a secret was to confide it to nobody; every time you did, you doubled, maybe even squared, the chances of exposure.</p>
			<p>He told his father, when Rodney Maxwell came in from the dig, about his talk with Klem Zareff.</p>
			<p>“How long’s he been like that, anyhow?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“As long as I’ve known him. When it comes to melons and wine and bossing tramp labor and taking care of his money and coming in out of the rain, Klem Zareff’s as sane as I am. But on the subject of the Terran Federation, he’s crazy as a bedbug. What is a bedbug, anyhow?”</p>
			<p>“They have them on Terra, in places like Tramptown. They have places like Tramptown on Terra, too.”</p>
			<p>“Uhuh. I suppose, in Klem’s boots, I’d be just as crazy as he is,” Rodney Maxwell said. “One minute, he had a wife and two children in Kindelburg, on Ashmodai, and the next minute Kindelburg was a puddle of radioactive slag.”</p>
			<p>“That was in ’51, wasn’t it? I read about it,” Conn said. “It was a famous victory.”</p>
			<p>That was from a poem, too.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Rodney Maxwell flew to Storisende early the next morning. Conn rode back to Tenth Army on an empty scow and pitched into the job of getting the stores and equipment out of the underground shelters. More farm-tramps arrived, and had to be pounded into obedience and taught the work. At the same time, Litchfield was getting a steady influx of job-seekers, and a secondary swarm of thugs, grifters and gangsters who followed them. Klem Zareff, having gotten all his melons pressed, came out to Tenth Army, where he selected fifty of the best men from the work-gangs and began drilling them as soldiers to guard the next operation. The manual of arms, drill and salute he taught them was, of course, System States Alliance.</p>
			<p>A week later, the ship arrived from Storisende; a hundred and sixty feet, three thousand tons, small enough to be berthed inside a hyperspace transport, and fast enough to get a load of ammunition to troops at the front, unload, and get out again before the enemy could zero in on her, and armed to fight off any Army Air Force combat craft. The delay had been in recruiting officers and crew. The captain and chief engineer were out-of-work shipline officers, the gunner was a former Federation artillery officer, and the crew looked more like pirates than most pirates did.</p>
			<p>They christened her the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lester Dawes</i>, because Dawes had secured her and because the name began with the initials of Litchfield Exploration &amp; Salvage. From then on, it was a race to see whether the Tenth Army attack-shelters would be emptied before the wine was all pressed, or vice versa.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
